In this segment i'm going to introduce
the idea of lexicalizing PCFGs.
So let's look at a basic PCFG here and
see how the probabilities
of rules actually work.
So what we have in the PCFG
is local trees corresponding
to rules such as verb
phrase rewrites as VBD,
PP and
that has some probability attached to it.
Like maybe that probability
be 0.03 about 3% of verb
phrases expand as a past tense
verb in a prepositional phrase.
While similarly we have other
rules that we have up here.
A sentence goes to NP VP rule.
And that would have a much
higher probability.
Maybe its probability is 0.4 or
something like that.
But the really important
thing to notice is that
these rules make no reference
whatsoever to actual words.
So this is saying that overall,
about 3% of verb phrases consist of a past
tense verb and a prepositional phrase.
But whether that's likely or
not depends an awful lot on
which verb we're dealing with.
So in this example here, we have the word
verb walked and walked is the kind of
motion verb that is really, really
likely to have a PP following after it.
Whereas if we had another verb for
example if we had the verb saw.
Then that'd be a past tense verb but
it'd be really unlikely to have
a prepositional phrase coming after it.
Something like, he saw in the mirror,
or something like that.
You'd normally get a noun-phrase
object after saw first.
So, it seems like we can only really
come up with good probability estimates
if we know more about
the words in the sentence.
And so that's precisely what
the idea of lexicalization is.
The idea of lexicalization is,
let's define for
each category a way of finding its head.
For a noun phrase we'll say
that the last noun in it,
whether a proper noun or a common noun,
will be declared its head.
And so, this noun phrase we'll
say that its head is Sue.
And for this noun phrase here we'll
say that its head is the word store.
Because this is the last
noun in the noun phrase and
we'll apply that to other ideas.
So for verb phrase the head of a verb
phrase will be the verb inside it.
So the head of verb phrase is walked.
And for a prepositional phrase the head
will be the preposition inside it into.
And we'll say that the head of
a sentence is the head of a verb phrase.
So we put in this way lexical items
that represent the head of each phrase
next to each non-terminal in the grammar.
Let me give my more neatly
printed version of that here.
Okay well what happens if we do that?
Well what we then find is that
we've now got these categories.
Like S walked which
are a combination of our
old nonterminals plus some lexical item.
And so if we do that we've enormously,
enormously expanded our
affected space of nonterminals.
Because if we had something
like 20 nonterminals before but
we had something like 30,000
words in our vocabulary.
Well, now we've got 600,000
nonterminals in our grammar.
And so that suggests we need to start
doing some more special engineering to be
able to do that.
Let's not worry about that for
the moment and
let's just think in terms of probabilities
what this will allow us to do.
Well the neat thing this
will allow us to do is
now if we're looking at what's
the probability of this sub tree.
We won't just be saying what's
the probability of a verb.
Expanding to a past tense verb phrase,
expanding into a past tense verb and a PP.
We'll be saying what's the probability of
a verb phrase headed by walk making a PP,
in particular a PP that's headed by into.
And so we're now going to be
capturing inside the wall two things.
We'll be capturing both that a VP walk
Is likely to take a PP after it.
And we will be capturing
the relationship between the heads here.
So we'll be capturing the relationship
that is reasonable to have
someone walk into something.
And so we have a lot of much richer
probabilistic conditioning being captured
by our grammar.
This extra information will be really,
really useful for
resolving various kinds of ambiguities.
So a classic example of that is
prepositional phrase attachment.
So if we want to work out for
a prepositional phrase, whether,
it is modifying a noun that precedes,
or modifying a verb that precedes.
Well, we can capture quite a lot of that
inside a PCFG, once we lexicalize it.
because now,
we'll have a role where an NP rates
is taking on its right hand side,
a PP for.
And we can ask whether that is
a likely thing to happen or not.
Or we can say we have
a VP announce is taking,
expanding on its right
hand side to a PP in.
Is that a reasonable thing to happen or
not?
And so
we can use this information to better
model PP attachments than
we could in a vanilla PCFG.
That doesn't mean we can capture
everything about PP attachments in this
model though.
And actually if you want to,
you could think a little, about what other
things that you'd like to know about
attaching a prepositional phrase,
which aren't yet captured in this model.
Where we have a head word pinned
onto every phrase like this.
But nonetheless,
this kind of head lexicalization captures
most of the additional things that you'd
like to know to make the various
passing decisions of a sentence.
So it's also useful for
things like coordination scope,
knowing about the complementation
patterns of verbs and so on.
Indeed there was the case that
doing this lexicalization
of PCFGs was seen as the parsing
breakthrough of the late 1990s.
So that's a really useful
notion to know about.
Is this idea of lexicalizing PCFGs
to capture more of the necessary
probabilistic conditioning information
to make parsing decisions.